

This model is from the article:  
** The influence of cytokinin-auxin cross-regulation on cell-fate determination in Arabidopsis thaliana root development **   
Muraro D, Byrne H, King J, Voss U, Kieber J, Bennett M. _J Theor Biol._2011
Aug 21;283(1):152-67. PMID:
[21640126](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21640126),  
**Abstract:**   
Root growth and development in Arabidopsis thaliana are sustained by a
specialised zone termed the meristem, which contains a population of dividing
and differentiating cells that are functionally analogous to a stem cell niche
in animals. The hormones auxin and cytokinin control meristem size
antagonistically. Local accumulation of auxin promotes cell division and the
initiation of a lateral root primordium. By contrast, high cytokinin
concentrations disrupt the regular pattern of divisions that characterises
lateral root development, and promote differentiation. The way in which the
hormones interact is controlled by a genetic regulatory network. In this
paper, we propose a deterministic mathematical model to describe this network
and present model simulations that reproduce the experimentally observed
effects of cytokinin on the expression of auxin regulated genes. We show how
auxin response genes and auxin efflux transporters may be affected by the
presence of cytokinin. We also analyse and compare the responses of the
hormones auxin and cytokinin to changes in their supply with the responses
obtained by genetic mutations of SHY2, which encodes a protein that plays a
key role in balancing cytokinin and auxin regulation of meristem size. We show
that although shy2 mutations can qualitatively reproduce the effect of varying
auxin and cytokinin supply on their response genes, some elements of the
network respond differently to changes in hormonal supply and to genetic
mutations, implying a different, general response of the network. We conclude
that an analysis based on the ratio between these two hormones may be
misleading and that a mathematical model can serve as a useful tool for
stimulate further experimental work by predicting the response of the network
to changes in hormone levels and to other genetic mutations.

